Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

11. Chronic Kidney Disease and
Risk Management: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2025

S239

American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S239–S251 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S011

11. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE AND RISK MANAGEMENT

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
For prevention and management of diabetes complications in children and adolescents, please refer to Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Screening
Recommendations

11.1a Assess kidney function (i.e., spot urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio [UACR])
and estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR] in people with type 1 diabetes
with duration of $5 years and in all people with type 2 diabetes regardless of
treatment. B
11.1b In people with established chronic kidney disease (CKD), monitor urinary albumin (e.g., spot UACR) and eGFR 1–4 times per year depending on
the stage of the kidney disease (Fig. 11.1). B

Treatment
Recommendations

11.2 Optimize glucose management to reduce the risk or slow the progression
of CKD (Fig. 9.3). A
11.3 Optimize blood pressure management (aim for <130/80 mmHg [Fig.
10.2]) and reduce blood pressure variability to reduce the risk or slow the
progression of CKD and reduce cardiovascular risk. A
11.4a In nonpregnant people with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is recommended for those with
moderately increased albuminuria (UACR 30–299 mg/g creatinine) B and is
strongly recommended for those with severely increased albuminuria (UACR

*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 11. Chronic
kidney disease and risk management: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;
48(Suppl. 1):S239–S251
© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

S240

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Figure 11.1—Risk of CKD progression, cardiovascular disease risk, and mortality; frequency of visits; and referral to nephrology according to GFR
and albuminuria. The numbers in the boxes are a guide to the frequency of screening or monitoring (number of times per year). Green reﬂects no
evidence of CKD by estimated GFR or albuminuria, with screening indicated once per year. For monitoring of prevalent CKD, suggested monitoring
varies from once per year (yellow) to four times or more per year (i.e., every 1–3 months [deep red]) according to risks of CKD progression and
CKD complications (e.g., cardiovascular disease, anemia, and hyperparathyroidism). These are general parameters based only on expert opinion
and underlying comorbid conditions, and disease state must be taken into account, as should the likelihood of impacting a change in management
for any individual. CKD, chronic kidney disease; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate. Adapted from de Boer et al. (1).

$300 mg/g creatinine) and/or eGFR
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2 to maximally tolerated dose to prevent the progression
of kidney disease and reduce cardiovascular events. A
11.4b Monitor for increased serum
creatinine and for increased serum
potassium levels when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) are used,
or for hypokalemia when diuretics are
used at routine visits and 7–14 days after initiation or after a dose change. B
11.4c An ACE inhibitor or an ARB is
not recommended for the primary
prevention of CKD in people with
diabetes who have normal blood
pressure, normal UACR (<30 mg/g
creatinine), and normal eGFR. A
11.4d Continue renin-angiotensin system blockade for mild to moderate
increases in serum creatinine (#30%)
in individuals who have no signs of
extracellular ﬂuid volume depletion. A

11.5a For people with type 2 diabetes
and CKD, use of a sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor with
demonstrated beneﬁt is recommended
to reduce CKD progression and cardiovascular events in individuals with
eGFR $20 mL/min/1.73 m2. A
11.5b To reduce cardiovascular risk
and kidney disease progression in
people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD, a glucagon-like peptide 1 agonist with demonstrated beneﬁt in
this population is recommended. A
11.5c To reduce cardiovascular events
and CKD progression in people with
CKD and albuminuria, a nonsteroidal
MRA that has been shown to be effective in clinical trials is recommended
(if eGFR is $25 mL/min/1.73 m2). Potassium levels should be monitored. A
11.6 Potentially harmful antihypertensive medications in pregnancy should
be avoided in sexually active individuals of childbearing potential who are
not using reliable contraception and,

if used, should be switched prior
to conception to antihypertensive
medications considered safer during pregnancy. B
11.7 Aim to reduce urinary albumin
by $30% in people with CKD and albuminuria $300 mg/g to slow CKD
progression. B
11.8 For people with non–dialysisdependent stage G3 or higher CKD,
protein intake should be 0.8 g/kg
body weight per day, as for the general population. A For individuals on
dialysis, protein intake of 1.0–1.2
g/kg/day should be considered since
protein energy wasting is a major
problem for some individuals on dialysis. B
11.9 Individuals should be referred for
evaluation by a nephrologist if they
have continuously increasing urinary
albumin levels and/or continuously
decreasing eGFR and/or if the eGFR is
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2. A

diabetesjournals.org/care

11.10 Refer to a nephrologist for
uncertainty about the etiology of
kidney disease, difﬁcult management
issues, and rapidly progressing kidney
disease. B

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DIABETES AND
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is diagnosed by the persistent elevation of urinary albumin excretion (albuminuria),
low estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
(eGFR), or other manifestations of kidney damage (1). In this section, the focus is on CKD attributed to diabetes in
adults, which occurs in 20–40% of people with diabetes (1–4). CKD in people
with diabetes typically develops after a
duration of 10 years in type 1 diabetes
(the most common presentation is 5–15
years after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes) but may be present at diagnosis
of type 2 diabetes. CKD can progress to
kidney failure requiring dialysis or kidney transplantation and is the leading
cause of end-stage kidney disease
(ESKD) in the U.S. (5). In addition,
among people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, the presence of CKD markedly
increases cardiovascular risk and health
care costs (6). For details on the management of CKD in children with diabetes, please see Section 14, “Children
and Adolescents.”
ASSESSMENT OF ALBUMINURIA
AND ESTIMATED GLOMERULAR
FILTRATION RATE

Screening for albuminuria can be most
easily performed by urine albumin-tocreatinine ratio (UACR) in a random spot
urine collection (1). Timed or 24-h collections are more burdensome and add little
to prediction or accuracy. Measurement
of a spot urine sample for albumin alone
(whether by immunoassay or by using a
sensitive dipstick test speciﬁc for albuminuria) without simultaneously measuring urine creatinine is less expensive
but susceptible to false-negative and falsepositive determinations as a result of variation in urine concentration due to hydration (7). Thus, semiquantitative or
qualitative (dipstick) screening will need to
be conﬁrmed by UACR values in an accredited laboratory (8,9). Hence, it is better to
simply collect a spot urine sample for

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

albumin-to-creatinine ratio because it will
ultimately need to be done.
Normal level of urine albumin excretion is deﬁned as <30 mg/g creatinine,
moderately elevated albuminuria is deﬁned as $30–300 mg/g creatinine, and
severely elevated albuminuria is deﬁned as
$300 mg/g creatinine. However, UACR is a
continuous measurement, and differences
within the normal and abnormal ranges are
associated with kidney and cardiovascular
outcomes (6,10,11). Furthermore, because
of high biological variability of >20% between measurements in urinary albumin excretion, two of three specimens of UACR
collected within a 3-to 6-month period
should be abnormal before considering
an individual to have moderately or severely elevated albuminuria (1,12,13). Exercise within 24 h, infection, fever, heart
failure, marked hyperglycemia, menstruation, and marked hypertension may elevate UACR independently of kidney
damage (14). Moreover, a recent analysis
showed variability in the measurement
of UACR when measured weekly over a
1-month period. Thus, repeated measurements and tracking of trending over
time are needed to properly follow
changes in UACR (12).
Traditionally, eGFR is calculated from
serum creatinine using a validated formula (15). eGFR is routinely reported by
laboratories along with serum creatinine, and eGFR calculators are available
online at nkdep.nih.gov. An eGFR persistently <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and/or an
urinary albumin value of >30 mg/g creatinine is considered abnormal, though optimal thresholds for clinical diagnosis are
debated in older adults over age 70 years
(1,16). Historically, a correction factor for
muscle mass was included in a modiﬁed
equation for African American people;
however, race is a social and not a biologic construct, making it problematic to
apply race to clinical algorithms. Hence,
the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology
Collaboration (CKD-EPI) creatinine equation was reﬁt without the race variable
and should be used for everyone (17,18).
Additionally, increased use of cystatin
C (another marker of eGFR) is suggested
in combination with serum creatinine because combining ﬁltration markers (creatinine and cystatin C) is more accurate and
would support better clinical decisions
than either marker alone.

DIAGNOSIS OF CHRONIC KIDNEY
DISEASE IN PEOPLE WITH
DIABETES

CKD in people with diabetes is usually a
clinical diagnosis made based on the presence of albuminuria and/or reduced eGFR
in the absence of signs or symptoms of
other primary causes of kidney damage.
The typical presentation of CKD in people
with diabetes is considered to include
long-standing duration of diabetes, retinopathy, albuminuria without gross hematuria, and gradually progressive loss of
eGFR. However, signs of CKD may be present at diagnosis or without retinopathy
in type 2 diabetes. Reduced eGFR without
albuminuria has been frequently reported
in type 1 and type 2 diabetes and is becoming more common over time as the
prevalence of diabetes increases in the
U.S. (2,3,16,19–21). An active urinary sediment (containing red or white blood cells
or cellular casts), rapidly increasing albuminuria or total proteinuria, the presence
of nephrotic syndrome, rapidly decreasing
eGFR, or the absence of retinopathy (in
type 1 diabetes) suggests alternative or
additional causes of kidney disease. For individuals with these features, referral to a
nephrologist for further diagnosis, including the possibility of kidney biopsy, should
be considered. It is rare for people with
type 1 diabetes to develop kidney disease
without retinopathy. In type 2 diabetes,
retinopathy is only moderately sensitive
and speciﬁc for CKD caused by diabetes,
as conﬁrmed by kidney biopsy (22). It cannot be deﬁnitively stated that a person
with diabetes and CKD has CKD related to
diabetes unless the person has a kidney
biopsy, as there may be another cause or
multiple causes. Hence, without a biopsy, it
is recommended to state that the individual
has CKD in a person with diabetes. In most
people, there is no need for a kidney biopsy, as the other possible diagnoses would
not change treatment. Referral to a nephrologist should be done if there are any
reasons to consider another cause of CKD
in a person with diabetes (Table 11.1).
STAGING OF CHRONIC KIDNEY
DISEASE

Stage G1 and stage G2 CKD are deﬁned
by evidence of high albuminuria with
eGFR $60 mL/min/1.73 m2, and stages
G3-G5 CKD are deﬁned by progressively
lower ranges of eGFR (23) (Fig. 11.1). At
any eGFR, the degree of albuminuria is

S241

S242

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Table 11.1—Reasons to consider nondiabetic kidney diseases in a person with
chronic kidney disease and diabetes
• Type 1 diabetes duration <5 years
• Active urine sediment (e.g., containing red blood cells or cellular casts)
• Chronically well-managed blood glucose
• Rapidly declining eGFR
• Rapidly increasing or very high UACR or urine protein/creatinine level
• No retinopathy in a person with type 1 diabetes
Information adapted from Liang et al. (129). eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate;
UACR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio.

associated with risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD), CKD progression, and mortality (6). Therefore, there is an additional
subclassiﬁcation by level of urine albumin
(Fig. 11.1). Furthermore, Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) recommends a more comprehensive CKD
staging that incorporates albuminuria at
all stages of eGFR; this system is more
closely associated with risk but is also more
complex (1). Thus, based on the current
classiﬁcation system, both eGFR and albuminuria must be quantiﬁed to guide treatment decisions. Quantiﬁcation of eGFR
levels is essential for modiﬁcations of medication dosages or restrictions of use (Fig.
11.1) (23,24), and the degree of albuminuria should inﬂuence the choice of antihypertensive medications (see Section 10,
“Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management”) or glucose-lowering medications (see below). Observed history of
eGFR loss (which is also associated with risk
of CKD progression and other adverse
health outcomes) and cause of kidney damage (including possible causes other than diabetes) may also affect these decisions (25).
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is diagnosed
by a sustained increase in serum creatinine over a short period of time, which
is also reﬂected as a rapid decrease in
eGFR (26,27). People with diabetes are at
higher risk of AKI than those without diabetes (28). Other risk factors for AKI include
preexisting CKD, the use of medications
that cause kidney injury (e.g., nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs), certain intravenous dyes (e.g., iodinated radiocontrast
agents) and the use of medications that
alter renal blood ﬂow and intrarenal hemodynamics. In particular, many antihypertensive medications (e.g., diuretics,
ACE inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor
blockers [ARBs]) can reduce intravascular
volume, renal blood ﬂow, and/or

glomerular ﬁltration. There was concern
that sodium–glucose cotransporter 2
(SGLT2) inhibitors may promote AKI
through volume depletion, particularly
when combined with diuretics or other
medications that reduce glomerular ﬁltration; however, this has not been found to
be true in randomized controlled trials of
advanced kidney disease (29) or high CVD
risk with normal kidney function (30–32). It
is also noteworthy that the nonsteroidal
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
(MRAs) do not increase the risk of AKI when
used to slow kidney disease progression
(33). Timely identiﬁcation and treatment of
AKI is important because AKI is associated
with increased risks of progressive CKD and
other poor health outcomes (34).
Elevations in serum creatinine (up to
30% from baseline) with renin-angiotensin
system (RAS) blockers (such as ACE inhibitors and ARBs) must not be confused
with AKI (35). An analysis of the Action to
Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
Blood Pressure (ACCORD BP) trial demonstrated that participants randomized to intensive blood pressure lowering with up
to a 30% increase in serum creatinine did
not have any increase in mortality or progressive kidney disease (36,37). Moreover,
a measure of markers for AKI showed no
signiﬁcant increase of any markers with
increased creatinine (37).
Accordingly, ACE inhibitors and ARBs
should not be discontinued for increases
in serum creatinine (<30%) in the absence of volume depletion.
SURVEILLANCE

Both albuminuria and eGFR should be
monitored annually to enable timely diagnosis of CKD, monitor progression of
CKD, detect superimposed kidney diseases
including AKI, assess risk of CKD complications, dose medications appropriately, and
determine whether nephrology referral is
needed. Among people with existing

kidney disease, albuminuria and eGFR may
change due to progression of CKD, development of a separate superimposed cause of
kidney disease, AKI, or other effects of medications, as noted above. Serum potassium
should also be monitored in individuals
treated with diuretics because these medications can cause hypokalemia, which is associated with cardiovascular risk and
mortality (38–40). Individuals with eGFR
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2 receiving ACE inhibitors, ARBs, or MRAs should have serum potassium measured periodically. Additionally,
people with this lower range of eGFR
should have their medication dosing veriﬁed, their exposure to nephrotoxins (e.g.,
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and
iodinated contrast) should be minimized,
and they should be evaluated for potential
CKD complications (Table 11.2).
There is a clear need for annual quantitative assessment of UACR. This is especially true after a diagnosis of albuminuria,
institution of ACE inhibitors or ARB therapy to maximum tolerated doses, and
achievement of blood pressure goals. Early
changes in kidney function may be detected by increases in albuminuria before
changes in eGFR (41), and this also signiﬁcantly affects cardiovascular risk. Continued surveillance can assess both response
to therapy and disease progression and
may aid in assessing participation in ACE
inhibitor or ARB therapy. In addition, in
clinical trials of ACE inhibitor or ARB
therapy in people with type 2 diabetes,
reducing albuminuria to levels <300 mg/g
creatinine or by >30% from baseline has
been associated with improved kidney
and cardiovascular outcomes, leading
to the recommendation that medications should be titrated to maximize reduction in UACR (8). See Table 11.3 for
interventions that lower albuminuria.
Data from post hoc analyses demonstrate less beneﬁt on cardiorenal outcomes at half doses of RAS blockade (42).
In type 1 diabetes, remission of albuminuria may occur spontaneously, and cohort
studies evaluating associations of change
in albuminuria with clinical outcomes have
reported inconsistent results (43,44).
The prevalence of CKD complications
correlates with eGFR (40). When eGFR is
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2, screening for complications of CKD is indicated (Table 11.2).
Early vaccination against hepatitis B virus
is indicated in individuals likely to progress
to ESKD (see Section 4, “Comprehensive
Medical Evaluation and Assessment of

diabetesjournals.org/care

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

Table 11.2—Screening for selected complications of chronic kidney disease
Complication

Physical and laboratory evaluation

Blood pressure >130/80 mmHg

Blood pressure, weight, BMI

Volume overload

History, physical examination, weight

Electrolyte abnormalities

Serum electrolytes

Metabolic acidosis

Serum electrolytes

Anemia

Hemoglobin; iron, iron saturation, ferritin testing
if indicated

Metabolic bone disease

Serum calcium, phosphate, PTH, vitamin 25(OH)D

Complications of chronic kidney disease (CKD) generally become prevalent when estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate falls below 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (stage G3 CKD or greater) and become more common and severe as CKD progresses. Evaluation of elevated blood pressure
and volume overload should occur at every clinical contact possible; laboratory evaluations are
generally indicated every 6–12 months for stage G3 CKD, every 3–5 months for stage G4 CKD,
and every 1–3 months for stage G5 CKD, or as indicated to evaluate symptoms or changes in
therapy. 25(OH)D, 25-hydroxyvitamin D; PTH, parathyroid hormone.

Comorbidities,” for further information on
immunization).
Prevention

The only proven primary prevention interventions for CKD in people with diabetes
are blood glucose (A1C goal of 7%) and
blood pressure management. There is no
evidence that renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system inhibitors or any other interventions
prevent the development of CKD in the absence of hypertension or albuminuria. Thus,
the American Diabetes Association does not
recommend routine use of these medications solely for the purpose of prevention
of the development of CKD. In 2023, the
Glycemia Reduction Approaches in Diabetes: A Comparative Effectiveness Study
(GRADE) was published (45). This large
prospective study compared liraglutide,
sitagliptin, glimeperide, and insulin glargine with respect to achieving and maintaining A1C goals in people with type 2
diabetes treated with metformin monotherapy; kidney and cardiovascular end
points were examined as secondary outcomes. A total of 5,047 participants were
enrolled from July 2013 to August 2017
and were followed for an average of

5 years. Almost all participants did not
have signs of kidney disease at the time
of enrollment. No differences between
the examined medications were observed,
which suggests that there were no unique
reno-protective effects among these medications for prevention. Of note, SGLT2 inhibitors were not included in the study, as
these medications were not routinely
available at the time the study started.
INTERVENTIONS
Nutrition

For people with stages 3–5 non–dialysisdependent CKD, dietary protein intake
should be 0.8 g/kg body weight per day
(the recommended daily allowance) (1).
Compared with higher levels of dietary
protein intake, this level slowed GFR decline with evidence of a greater effect
over time. Higher levels of dietary protein
intake (>20% of daily calories from protein
or >1.3 g/kg/day) have been associated
with increased albuminuria, more rapid
kidney function loss, and CVD mortality
and therefore should be avoided. Reducing the amount of dietary protein below
the recommended daily allowance of

Table 11.3—Interventions that lower albuminuria
• Blood glucose management
• Blood pressure management
• Treatment with ACE inhibitors or ARBs
• Smoking cessation
• Weight loss
• Changes in eating patterns (decreased salt intake and/or protein intake)
• Treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors, MRAs, or GLP-1 RAs
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; MRA,
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist.

0.8 g/kg/day is not recommended because
it does not alter blood glucose levels, cardiovascular risk measures, or the course of
GFR decline (46). Some organizations recommend a lower protein intake (0.6–0.8 g/
kg/day). In particular, guidelines from the
National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (NKF
KDOQI) (47) and the International Society of Renal Nutrition and Metabolism
(48) recommend a lower protein intake
level for reno-protection and state that
this lower level is relatively safe. However, for CKD in diabetes, the expert
grade is “opinion” only. The guidelines
note that the evidence for lower protein
intake in people with CKD has been published for only those without diabetes,
which is graded Level 1A. Low-protein
eating patterns should only be followed
alongside guidance from a health care
professional experienced in managing nutrition for people with CKD.
Restriction of dietary sodium (to
<2,300 mg/day) may be useful to manage
blood pressure and reduce cardiovascular
risk (49,50), and individualization of dietary
potassium may be necessary to manage serum potassium concentrations (28,38–40).
These interventions may be most important
for individuals with reduced eGFR, for whom
urinary excretion of sodium and potassium
may be impaired. For individuals on dialysis,
higher levels of dietary protein intake should
be considered since protein-energy wasting
is a major problem for some individuals
on dialysis (51). Recommendations for
dietary sodium and potassium intake
should be individualized based on comorbid
conditions, medication use, blood pressure,
and laboratory data.
Glycemic Goals

Intensive lowering of blood glucose with
the goal of achieving near-normoglycemia
has been shown in large, randomized studies to delay the onset and progression of albuminuria and reduce eGFR in people with
type 1 diabetes (52,53) and type 2 diabetes
(1,54–59). Insulin alone was used to lower
blood glucose in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications
(EDIC) study of type 1 diabetes, while a variety of agents were used in clinical trials of
type 2 diabetes, supporting the conclusion
that lowering blood glucose itself helps prevent CKD and its progression. The effects of
glucose-lowering therapies on CKD have
helped deﬁne A1C goals.

S243

S244

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

The presence of CKD affects the risks
and beneﬁts of intensive lowering of
blood glucose and a number of speciﬁc
glucose-lowering medications. Adverse
effects of intensive management of
blood glucose levels (hypoglycemia and
mortality) were increased among people
with kidney disease at baseline (60).
Moreover, there is a lag time of at least 2
years in type 2 diabetes to over 10 years
in type 1 diabetes for the effects of intensive glucose control to manifest as
improved eGFR outcomes (57,61,62).
Therefore, in some people with prevalent
CKD and substantial comorbidity, treatment may be less intensive (i.e., A1C
goals may be higher) to decrease the risk
of hypoglycemia (1,63). A1C levels are
also less reliable at advanced CKD stages
(64,65).
Blood Pressure and Use of ACE
Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor
Blockers

ACE inhibitors and ARBs remain a mainstay of management for people with
CKD with albuminuria and for the treatment of hypertension in people with diabetes (with or without CKD in people
with diabetes). Indeed, all the trials that
evaluated the beneﬁts of SGLT2 inhibition
or nonsteroidal MRA effects were done in
individuals who were being treated with
an ACE inhibitor or ARB, in some trials up
to maximum tolerated doses.
Hypertension is a strong risk factor
for the development and progression of
CKD (66). Antihypertensive therapy reduces the risk of albuminuria (67–70),
and among people with type 1 or 2 diabetes with established CKD (eGFR
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and UACR $300
mg/g creatinine), ACE inhibitor or ARB
therapy reduces the risk of progression to ESKD (71–80). Moreover, antihypertensive therapy reduces the risk
of cardiovascular events (67).
A blood pressure level <130/80 mmHg
is recommended to reduce CVD mortality
and slow CKD progression among all people with diabetes. Lower blood pressure
goals (e.g., <130/80 mmHg) should be
considered based on individual anticipated
beneﬁts and risks. People with CKD are at
increased risk of CKD progression (particularly those with albuminuria) and CVD;
therefore, lower blood pressure goals may
be suitable in some cases, especially in individuals with severely elevated albuminuria ($300 mg/g creatinine).

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

ACE inhibitors or ARBs are the preferred ﬁrst-line agents for blood pressure
treatment among people with diabetes,
hypertension, eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2,
and UACR $300 mg/g creatinine because
of their proven beneﬁts for prevention of
CKD progression (71,72,74). ACE inhibitors
and ARBs are considered to have similar
beneﬁts (75,76) and risks. In the setting
of lower levels of albuminuria (30–299
mg/g creatinine), ACE inhibitor or ARB
therapy at maximum tolerated doses in
trials has reduced progression to more
advanced albuminuria ($300 mg/g creatinine), slowed CKD progression, and reduced cardiovascular events but has not
reduced progression to ESKD (74,77).
While ACE inhibitors or ARBs are often
prescribed for moderately increased albuminuria (30–299 mg/g creatinine) without
hypertension, outcome trials have not been
performed in this setting to determine
whether they improve kidney outcomes.
Moreover, two long-term, double-blind
studies demonstrated no renoprotective
effect of either ACE inhibitors or ARBs
among people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes who were normotensive with or
without high albuminuria (formerly microalbuminuria, 30–299 mg/g creatinine) (78,79).
It should be noted that ACE inhibitors
and ARBs are commonly not dosed at
maximum tolerated doses because of
concerns that serum creatinine will rise.
As previously noted, not maximizing
these therapies for this reason would
be considered suboptimal care. Note
that in all clinical trials demonstrating
efﬁcacy of ACE inhibitors and ARBs in
slowing kidney disease progression, the
maximum tolerated doses were used—
not very low doses that do not provide
beneﬁt. Moreover, there are now studies demonstrating outcome beneﬁts on
both mortality and slowed CKD progression in people with diabetes who have
an eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (80). Additionally, when increases in serum creatinine reach 30% without associated
hyperkalemia, RAS blockade should be
continued (36,81).
Two recent large retrospective analyses provide additional support for the
aggressive use of ACE inhibitors and
ARBs in individuals with CKD. Ku et al.
(82) reviewed 17 trials that included
11,800 individuals with CKD (deﬁned as
eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2); 82% had
diabetes. The authors reported that a
<13% decline in eGFR over a 3-month

period or a <21% decline in a 1-month
period was associated with better longterm kidney outcomes. Hattori et al.
(83) evaluated 6,065 participants between 2005 and 2021 (approximately
40% had diabetes) with eGFR ranging
from 10 to 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 who
had ACE inhibitors or ARBs stopped
(usually due to hyperkalemia or AKI)
and found that those who restarted the
ACE inhibitor or ARB had better long-term
kidney outcomes and lower mortality
(there was no signiﬁcant difference in hyperkalemia in those who restarted ACE inhibitors or ARBs). There is also an accompanying editorial that details the strengths
and weaknesses of the studies (84).
In the absence of kidney disease, ACE
inhibitors or ARBs are useful to manage
blood pressure but have not proven superior to alternative classes of antihypertensive therapy, including thiazide-like diuretics
and dihydropyridine calcium channel
blockers (85). In a trial of people with
type 2 diabetes and normal urinary albumin excretion, an ARB reduced or
suppressed the development of albuminuria but increased the rate of cardiovascular events (86). In a trial of
people with type 1 diabetes exhibiting
neither albuminuria nor hypertension,
ACE inhibitors or ARBs did not prevent
the development of glomerulopathy assessed by kidney biopsy (78). This was
further supported by a similar trial in
people with type 2 diabetes (79).
Two clinical trials studied the combinations of ACE inhibitors and ARBs and
found no beneﬁts on CVD or CKD, and
the medication combination had higher
adverse event rates (hyperkalemia and/or
AKI) (87,88). Therefore, the combined use
of ACE inhibitors and ARBs should be
avoided.
Direct Kidney Effects of
Glucose-Lowering Medications

Some glucose-lowering medications also
have effects on the kidney that are direct,
i.e., not mediated through glycemia. For
example, SGLT2 inhibitors reduce renal tubular glucose reabsorption, weight, systemic
blood pressure, intraglomerular pressure,
and albuminuria and slow GFR loss through
mechanisms that appear independent of
glycemia (31,89–92). Moreover, recent
data support the notion that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce oxidative stress in the kidney by
>50% and blunt increases in angiotensinogen as well as reduce NLRP3 inﬂammasome

diabetesjournals.org/care

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

activity (92–94). Glucagon-like peptide 1
(GLP-1) receptor agonists (RAs) have
also been shown to improve kidney outcomes (95–100). Kidney effects should
be considered when selecting agents
for glucose lowering (see Section 9,
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic
Treatment”).

KDIGO consensus recommendation algorithm for medications in people with
diabetes and CKD.
The FDA revised its guidance for the
use of metformin in CKD in 2016 (103),
recommending use of eGFR instead of serum creatinine to guide treatment and expanding the pool of people with kidney
disease for whom metformin treatment
should be considered. The revised FDA
guidance states that 1) metformin is contraindicated in individuals with an eGFR
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2, 2) eGFR should be
monitored while taking metformin, 3) the
beneﬁts and risks of continuing treatment
should be reassessed when eGFR falls to
<45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (104,105), 4) metformin should not be initiated for individuals with an eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2,
and 5) metformin should be temporarily discontinued at the time of or before iodinated
contrast imaging procedures in individuals
with eGFR 30–60 mL/min/1.73 m2.

Selection of Glucose-Lowering
Medications for People With Chronic
Kidney Disease

For people with type 2 diabetes and established CKD, special considerations for
the selection of glucose-lowering medications include limitations to available
medications when eGFR is diminished
and a desire to mitigate risks of CKD
progression, CVD, and hypoglycemia
(101,102). Medication dosing may require
modiﬁcation with eGFR <60 mL/min/
1.73 m2 (1). Figure 11.2 shows the
American Diabetes Association and

A number of recent studies have shown
cardiovascular protection from SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs as well as kidney
protection from SGLT2 inhibitors and from
GLP-1 RAs. Selection of which glucose-lowering medications to use should be based
on the usual criteria of an individual’s risks
(cardiovascular and kidney in addition to
glucose management) as well as considerations of effects on weight, other adverse effects, individual preferences, and cost.
SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended for
people with eGFR $20 mL/min/1.73 m2
and type 2 diabetes, as they slow CKD
progression and reduce heart failure
risk independent of glucose management
(106). GLP-1 RAs are suggested for cardiovascular risk reduction if such risk is a predominant problem, as they reduce risks
of CVD events and hypoglycemia and
slow progression of CKD (100,107–110).
A number of large cardiovascular outcomes trials in people with type 2 diabetes

‡

Figure 11.2—Holistic approach for improving outcomes in people with diabetes and CKD. Icons presented indicate the following beneﬁts: BP cuff, BP
lowering; glucose meter, glucose lowering; heart, cardioprotection; kidney, kidney protection; scale, weight management. eGFR is presented in units
of mL/min/1.73 m2. *ACEi or ARB (at maximal tolerated doses) should be ﬁrst-line therapy for hypertension when albuminuria is present. Otherwise, dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker or diuretic can also be considered; all three classes are often needed to attain BP targets. †Finerenone is currently
the only ns-MRA with proven clinical kidney and cardiovascular beneﬁts. ‡Semaglutide can be used as another ﬁrst-line agent for people with CKD. ACEi,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ACR, albumin-to creatinine ratio; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; BP, blood pressure; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like
peptide 1 receptor agonist; HTN, hypertension; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; ns-MRA, nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; PCSK9i, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor; RAS, renin-angiotensin system; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor;
T1D, type 1 diabetes; T2D, type 2 diabetes. Adapted from de Boer et al. (1).

S245

S246

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

at high risk for CVD or with existing CVD
examined kidney effects as secondary outcomes. These trials include EMPA-REG
OUTCOME [BI 10773 (Empagliﬂozin) Cardiovascular Outcome Event Trial in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus Patients], CANVAS
(Canagliﬂozin Cardiovascular Assessment
Study), LEADER (Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcome Results), and SUSTAIN-6
(Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and
Other Long-term Outcomes With Semaglutide in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes)
(91,95,98,111). Speciﬁcally, compared with
placebo, empagliﬂozin reduced the risk
of incident or worsening nephropathy
(a composite of progression to UACR
>300 mg/g creatinine, doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD, or death from
ESKD) by 39% and the risk of doubling of
serum creatinine accompanied by eGFR
#45 mL/min/1.73 m2 by 44%; canagliﬂozin reduced the risk of progression of albuminuria by 27% and the risk of
reduction in eGFR, ESKD, or death from
ESKD by 40%; liraglutide reduced the risk
of new or worsening nephropathy (a
composite of persistent macroalbuminuria, doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD, or
death from ESKD) by 22%; and semaglutide
reduced the risk of new or worsening nephropathy (a composite of persistent UACR
>300 mg/g creatinine, doubling of serum
creatinine, or ESKD) by 36% (each P <
0.01). These analyses were limited by evaluation of study populations not selected primarily for CKD and examination of kidney
effects as secondary outcomes.
Three large clinical trials of SGLT2 inhibitors have focused on people with CKD and
assessment of primary kidney outcomes.
Canagliﬂozin and Renal Events in Diabetes
with Established Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE), a placebo-controlled trial
of canagliﬂozin among 4,401 adults with
type 2 diabetes, UACR $300–5,000 mg/g
creatinine, and eGFR range 30–90 mL/min/
1.73 m2 (mean eGFR 56 mL/min/1.73 m2
with a mean albuminuria level of >900
mg/day), had a primary composite end
point of ESKD, doubling of serum creatinine, or renal or cardiovascular death
(29,112). It was stopped early due to
positive efﬁcacy and showed a 32% risk
reduction for development of ESKD over
control (29). Additionally, the development
of the primary end point, which included dialysis for $30 days, kidney transplantation
or eGFR <15 mL/min/1.73 m2 sustained
for $30 days by central laboratory

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

assessment, doubling from the baseline serum creatinine average sustained for $30
days by central laboratory assessment, or
renal death or cardiovascular death, was reduced by 30%. This beneﬁt was on background ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy in
>99% of the participants (29). Moreover, in this advanced CKD group, there
were clear beneﬁts on cardiovascular outcomes demonstrating a 31% reduction in
cardiovascular death or heart failure hospitalization and a 20% reduction in cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction,
or nonfatal stroke (29,110,113).
A second trial in advanced CKD in people with diabetes was the Dapagliﬂozin
and Prevention of Adverse Outcomes in
Chronic Kidney Disease (DAPA-CKD) study
(114). This trial examined a cohort similar
to that in CREDENCE except 67.5% of the
participants had type 2 diabetes and CKD
(the other one-third had CKD without
type 2 diabetes), and the end points
were slightly different. The primary outcome was time to the ﬁrst occurrence of
any of the components of the composite,
including $50% sustained decline in eGFR
or reaching ESKD or cardiovascular death,
or renal death. Secondary outcome measures included time to the ﬁrst occurrence
of any of the components of the composite kidney outcome ($50% sustained decline in eGFR or reaching ESKD or renal
death), time to the ﬁrst occurrence of either of the components of the cardiovascular composite (cardiovascular death or
hospitalization for heart failure), and time
to death from any cause. The trial had
4,304 participants with a mean eGFR at
baseline of 43.1 ± 12.4 mL/min/1.73 m2
(range 25–75 mL/min/1.73 m2) and a
median UACR of 949 mg/g (range 200–
5,000 mg/g). There was a signiﬁcant beneﬁt by dapagliﬂozin for the primary end
point (hazard ratio [HR] 0.61 [95% CI
0.51–0.72]; P < 0.001) (114). The HR for
the kidney composite of a sustained decline in eGFR of $50%, ESKD, or death
from renal causes was 0.56 (95% CI
0.45–0.68; P < 0.001). The HR for the
composite of death from cardiovascular
causes or hospitalization for heart failure
was 0.71 (95% CI 0.55–0.92; P = 0.009). Finally, all-cause mortality was decreased in
the dapagliﬂozin group compared with the
placebo group (P < 0.004).
The most recently published clinical
trial was EMPA-KIDNEY (Study of Heart
and Kidney Protection with Empagliﬂozin)
(115). This study enrolled participants

with kidney disease with an eGFR of at
least 20 but less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m2
or who had an eGFR of at least 45 but
less than 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 with a
UACR of at least 200 mg/g creatinine. Approximately one-half of the 6,609 participants had diabetes. The empagliﬂozintreated participants had lower risk of progression of kidney disease and lower risk
of death from cardiovascular causes (HR
0.72 [95% CI 0.64–0.82]; P < 0.001).
With respect to cardiovascular outcomes,
SGLT2 inhibitors have demonstrated reduced risk of heart failure hospitalizations
and some also demonstrated cardiovascular
risk reduction. GLP-1 RAs have clearly
demonstrated cardiovascular beneﬁts.
(See Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease
and Risk Management,” for further detailed discussion.)
Of note, while the glucose-lowering effects of SGLT2 inhibitors are blunted with
eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2, the renal and
cardiovascular beneﬁts were still seen at
eGFR levels as low as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2
even with no signiﬁcant change in glucose
(29,31,52,63,98,111,114–116). Most participants with CKD in these trials also had
diagnosed atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (ASCVD) at baseline, although
28% of CANVAS participants with CKD
did not have diagnosed ASCVD (32).
Based on evidence from the CREDENCE,
DAPA-CKD, and EMPA-KIDNEY trials, as
well as secondary analyses of cardiovascular outcomes trials with SGLT2 inhibitors,
cardiovascular and renal events are reduced with SGLT2 inhibitor use in individuals with an eGFR of 20 mL/min/1.73 m2,
independent of glucose-lowering effects
(110,113).
The recently published FLOW study
demonstrated that the GLP-1 RA semaglutide had reno-protective effects in
people with CKD (100). The study enrolled 3,533 participants with signiﬁcant
kidney disease deﬁned by level of eGFR
and/or by level of albuminuria (of note,
all participants had an albuminuria level
of at least 100 mg/g). The primary outcome was deﬁned as the ﬁrst major kidney disease event (onset of >50% in
eGFR, onset of persistent eGFR of
<15 mL/min/1.73 m2, initiation of dialysis or transplant, renal death, and cardiovascular death). The study was stopped
early due to reaching a prespeciﬁed outcome. There was a 24% lower HR for those
taking semaglutide compared with the placebo group. Of note, cardiovascular deaths

diabetesjournals.org/care

comprised about 38% of the events. When
the cardiovascular deaths are removed
from the analysis, the HR for kidney speciﬁc events was 21% lower in those taking
semaglutide. Thus, the study supports a
beneﬁcial effect of semaglutide in slowing
decline in kidney function as well as being
cardioprotective in people with CKD and
type 2 diabetes. Of note, the participants
who took semaglutide had lower A1C,
lower blood pressure, and more weight
loss—all of which are beneﬁcial for
slowing decline in kidney function and
reducing cardiovascular adverse events.
Whether this beneﬁcial combination of effects was the primary cause for the renoprotective outcomes or whether there is a
unique reno-protective effect of semaglutide remains to be determined.
Adverse event proﬁles of these agents
also must be considered. Please refer to
Table 9.2 for medication-speciﬁc factors,
including adverse event information, for
these agents. Additional clinical trials focusing on CKD and cardiovascular outcomes in people with CKD are ongoing
and will be reported in the next few years.
For people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD, the selection of speciﬁc agents may
depend on comorbidity and CKD stage.
SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended for
individuals at high risk of CKD progression (i.e., with albuminuria or a history
of documented eGFR loss) (Fig. 9.3). For
people with type 2 diabetes and CKD,
use of an SGLT2 inhibitor in individuals
with eGFR $20 mL/min/1.73 m2 is recommended to reduce CKD progression
and cardiovascular events. The reason
for the limit of eGFR is as follows. The
major clinical trials for SGLT2 inhibitors
that showed beneﬁt for CKD in people
with diabetes are CREDENCE, DAPA-CKD,
and EMPA-KIDNEY. CREDENCE enrollment
criteria included eGFR >30 mL/min/1.73 m2
and UACR >300 mg/g (29,110). DAPACKD enrolled individuals with eGFR
>25 mL/min/1.73 m2 and UACR >200 mg/g.
Subgroup analyses from DAPA-CKD (117)
and analyses from the EMPEROR heart
failure trials suggest that SGLT2 inhibitors
are safe and effective at eGFR levels of
>20 mL/min/1.73 m2. The Empagliﬂozin
Outcome Trial in Patients With Chronic
Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Preserved) enrolled 5,998
participants (118), and the Empagliﬂozin
Outcome Trial in Patients With Chronic
Heart Failure and a Reduced Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Reduced) enrolled 3,730

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

participants (119); enrollment criteria included eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2, but
efﬁcacy was seen at eGFR >20 mL/min/
1.73 m2 in people with heart failure. Most
recently, the EMPA-KIDNEY trial showed
efﬁcacy in participants with eGFR as low
as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 (115). Hence, the
new recommendation is to use SGLT2 inhibitors in individuals with eGFR as low as
20 mL/min/1.73 m2. In addition, the DECLARE-TIMI 58 trial suggested effectiveness in participants with normal urinary
albumin levels (120). In sum, for people
with type 2 diabetes and CKD, use of an
SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended to reduce
CKD progression and cardiovascular events
in people with an eGFR $20 mL/min/
1.73 m2.
Of note, GLP-1 RAs may also be used
at low eGFR for cardiovascular protection but may require dose adjustment
(121).
Renal and Cardiovascular Outcomes
of Mineralocorticoid Receptor
Antagonists in Chronic Kidney Disease

MRAs historically have not been well
studied in people with diabetes and
CKD because of the risk of hyperkalemia
(122,123). However, data that do exist
suggest sustained beneﬁt on albuminuria reduction. There are two different
classes of MRAs, steroidal and nonsteroidal, with one group not extrapolatable to the other (124). Late in 2020,
the results of the ﬁrst of two trials, the
Finerenone in Reducing Kidney Failure and
Disease Progression in Diabetic Kidney Disease (FIDELIO-DKD) trial, which examined
the kidney effects of ﬁnerenone, demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in CKD
progression and cardiovascular events in
people with diabetes and advanced CKD
(33,125). This trial had a primary end point
of time to ﬁrst occurrence of the composite end point of onset of kidney failure, a
sustained decrease of eGFR >40% from
baseline over at least 4 weeks, or renal
death. A prespeciﬁed secondary outcome
was time to ﬁrst occurrence of the composite end point of cardiovascular death or
nonfatal cardiovascular events (myocardial
infarction, stroke, or hospitalization for
heart failure). Other secondary outcomes
included all-cause mortality, time to allcause hospitalizations, and change in UACR
from baseline to month 4, and time to ﬁrst
occurrence of the following composite end
point: onset of kidney failure, a sustained

decrease in eGFR of $57% from baseline
over at least 4 weeks, or renal death.
The double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial randomized 5,734 people with CKD
and type 2 diabetes to receive ﬁnerenone, a nonsteroidal MRA, or placebo.
Eligible participants had a UACR of 30 to
<300 mg/g, an eGFR of 25 to <60 mL/min/
1.73 m2, and diabetic retinopathy, or a
UACR of 300–5,000 mg/g and an eGFR of
25 to <75 mL/min/1.73 m2. The potassium
level had to be #4.8 mmol/L. The mean
age of participants was 65.6 years, and
30% were female. The mean eGFR was
44.3 mL/min/1.73 m2, and the mean albuminuria was 852 mg/g (interquartile range
446–1,634 mg/g). The primary end point
was reduced with ﬁnerenone compared
with placebo (HR 0.82 [95% CI 0.73–0.93];
P = 0.001), as was the key secondary composite of cardiovascular outcomes (HR 0.86
[95% CI 0.75–0.99]; P = 0.03). Hyperkalemia resulted in 2.3% discontinuation in the
study group compared with 0.9% in the
placebo group. However, the study was
completed, and there were no deaths related to hyperkalemia. Of note, 4.5% of the
total group were being treated with SGLT2
inhibitors.
The Finerenone in Reducing Cardiovascular Mortality and Morbidity in Diabetic Kidney Disease (FIGARO-DKD) trial
assessed the safety and efﬁcacy of ﬁnerenone in reducing cardiovascular events
among people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD with elevated UACR (30 to <300 mg/g
creatinine) and eGFR 25–90 mL/min/1.73
m2 (126). The potassium level had to be
#4.8 mmol/L The study randomized eligible subjects to either ﬁnerenone (n =
3,686) or placebo (n = 3,666). Participants
with an eGFR of 25–60 mL/min/1.73 m2
at the screening visit received an initial
dose at baseline of 10 mg once daily, and
if eGFR at screening was $60 mL/min/
1.73 m2, the initial dose was 20 mg once
daily. An increase in the dose from 10 to
20 mg once daily was encouraged after 1
month, provided the serum potassium
level was #4.8 mmol/L and eGFR was
stable. The mean age of participants was
64.1 years (31% were female), and the
median follow-up duration was 3.4 years.
The median A1C was 7.7%, the mean systolic blood pressure was 136 mmHg, and
the mean GFR was 67.8 mL/min/1.73 m2.
People with heart failure with a reduced
ejection fraction and uncontrolled hypertension were excluded.

S247

S248

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

The primary composite outcome was
cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for heart
failure. The ﬁnerenone group showed a
13% reduction in the primary end point
compared with the placebo group (12.4%
vs. 14.2%; HR 0.87 [95% CI 0.76–0.98];
P = 0.03). This beneﬁt was primarily
driven by a reduction in heart failure hospitalizations: 3.2% vs. 4.4% in the placebo
group (HR 0.71 [95% CI 0.56–0.90]).
Of the secondary outcomes, the most
noteworthy was a 36% reduction in
ESKD: 0.9% vs. 1.3% in the placebo
group (HR 0.64 [95% CI 0.41–0.995]).
There was a higher incidence of hyperkalemia in the ﬁnerenone group, 10.8%
vs. 5.3%, although only 1.2% of the
3,686 individuals on ﬁnerenone stopped
the study due to hyperkalemia.
The FIDELITY prespeciﬁed pooled efﬁcacy and safety analysis incorporated individuals from both the FIGARO-DKD
and FIDELIO-DKD trials (N = 13,171) to allow for evaluation across the spectrum of
severity of CKD, since the populations
were different (with a slight overlap) and
the study designs were similar (127). The
analysis showed a 14% reduction in composite cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, and
hospitalization for heart failure for ﬁnerenone vs. placebo (12.7% vs. 14.4%; HR
0.86 [95% CI 0.78–0.95]; P = 0.0018).
It also demonstrated a 23% reduction
in the composite kidney outcome, consisting of sustained $57% decrease in eGFR
from baseline over $4 weeks, or renal
death, for ﬁnerenone vs. placebo (5.5%
vs. 7.1%; HR 0.77 [95% CI 0.670.88]; P =
0.0002).
The pooled FIDELITY trial analysis conﬁrms and strengthens the positive cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with
ﬁnerenone across the spectrum of CKD,
irrespective of baseline ASCVD history
(with the exclusion of those with heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction).
Of note, there has not been a direct
comparison of MRAs and SGLT2 inhibitors. At this time, they can be used interchangeably or together for the goal of
slowing progression of CKD and providing
cardiovascular protection. There have also
been no studies directly comparing MRAs,
SGLT2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 RAs. Health
care professionals should use their best
judgement as to which medication to prescribe initially and in combination. As
noted, all of these studies included

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

participants taking either an ACE inhibitor
or an ARB, often at maximally tolerated
doses.
REFERRAL TO A NEPHROLOGIST

Health care professionals should consider
referral to a nephrologist if the individual
with diabetes has continuously rising UACR
levels and/or continuously declining eGFR,
if there is uncertainty about the etiology of
kidney disease, for difﬁcult management
issues (anemia, secondary hyperparathyroidism, signiﬁcant increases in albuminuria despite good blood pressure
management, metabolic bone disease,
resistant hypertension, or electrolyte disturbances), or when there is advanced kidney disease (eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2)
requiring discussion of renal replacement
therapy for ESKD (1). The threshold for
referral may vary depending on the frequency with which a health care professional encounters people with diabetes
and kidney disease. Consultation with a
nephrologist when stage 4 CKD develops
(eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2) has been
found to reduce cost, improve quality of
care, and delay dialysis (128).
However, other specialists and health
care professionals should also educate
people with diabetes about the progressive nature of CKD, the kidney preservation beneﬁts of proactive treatment of
blood pressure and blood glucose, and
the potential need for renal replacement therapy.
References
1. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al.
Diabetes management in chronic kidney disease:
a consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;45:
3075–3090
2. Afkarian M, Zelnick LR, Hall YN, et al. Clinical
manifestations of kidney disease among US
adults with diabetes, 1988-2014. JAMA 2016;316:
602–610
3. de Boer IH, Rue TC, Hall YN, Heagerty PJ, Weiss
NS, Himmelfarb J. Temporal trends in the
prevalence of diabetic kidney disease in the
United States. JAMA 2011;305:2532–2539
4. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Kidney disease
and related ﬁndings in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications study. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:24–30
5. Johansen KL, Chertow GM, Foley RN, et al. US
Renal Data System 2020 annual data report:
epidemiology of kidney disease in the United
States. Am J Kidney Dis 2021;77:A7–A8
6. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al.;
Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium.
Associations of kidney disease measures with

mortality and end-stage renal disease in individuals
with and without diabetes: a meta-analysis. Lancet
2012;380:1662–1673
7. Yarnoff BO, Hoerger TJ, Simpson SK, et al.;
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CKD
Initiative. The cost-effectiveness of using chronic
kidney disease risk scores to screen for earlystage chronic kidney disease. BMC Nephrol
2017;18:85
8. Coresh J, Heerspink HJL, Sang Y, et al.; Chronic
Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium and Chronic
Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration.
Change in albuminuria and subsequent risk of endstage kidney disease: an individual participant-level
consortium meta-analysis of observational studies.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:115–127
9. Levey AS, Gansevoort RT, Coresh J, et al.
Change in albuminuria and GFR as end points for
clinical trials in early stages of CKD: a scientiﬁc
workshop sponsored by the National Kidney
Foundation in collaboration with the US Food and
Drug Administration and European Medicines
Agency. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;75:84–104
10. Afkarian M, Sachs MC, Kestenbaum B, et al.
Kidney disease and increased mortality risk in
type 2 diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2013;24:
302–308
11. Groop P-H, Thomas MC, Moran JL, et al.;
FinnDiane Study Group. The presence and
severity of chronic kidney disease predicts allcause mortality in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
2009;58:1651–1658
12. Rasaratnam N, Salim A, Blackberry I, et al.
Urine albumin-creatinine ratio variability in people
with type 2 diabetes: clinical and research
implications. Am J Kidney Dis 2024;84:8–17.e1
13. Naresh CN, Hayen A, Weening A, Craig JC,
Chadban SJ. Day-to-day variability in spot urine
albumin-creatinine ratio. Am J Kidney Dis
2013;62:1095–1101
14. Tankeu AT, Kaze FF, Noubiap JJ, Chelo D,
Dehayem MY, Sobngwi E. Exercise-induced
albuminuria and circadian blood pressure abnormalities in type 2 diabetes. World J Nephrol
2017;6:209–216
15. Delanaye P, Glassock RJ, Pottel H, Rule AD.
An age-calibrated deﬁnition of chronic kidney
disease: rationale and beneﬁts. Clin Biochem Rev
2016;37:17–26
16. Kramer HJ, Nguyen QD, Curhan G, Hsu C-Y.
Renal insufﬁciency in the absence of albuminuria
and retinopathy among adults with type 2
diabetes mellitus. JAMA 2003;289:3273–3277
17. Inker LA, Eneanya ND, Coresh J, et al.; Chronic
Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration. New
creatinine- and cystatin C-based equations to
estimate GFR without race. N Engl J Med
2021;385:1737–1749
18. Miller WG, Kaufman HW, Levey AS, et al.
National Kidney Foundation Laboratory Engagement
Working Group recommendations for implementing
the CKD-EPI 2021 race-free equations for estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate: practical guidance for
clinical laboratories. Clin Chem 2022;68:511–520
19. Molitch ME, Steffes M, Sun W, et al.;
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications Study Group. Development and
progression of renal insufﬁciency with and without
albuminuria in adults with type 1 diabetes in the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and the
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and

diabetesjournals.org/care

Complications study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:
1536–1543
20. He F, Xia X, Wu XF, Yu XQ, Huang FX. Diabetic
retinopathy in predicting diabetic nephropathy in
patients with type 2 diabetes and renal disease: a
meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2013;56:457–466
21. Vistisen D, Andersen GS, Hulman A, Persson
F, Rossing P, Jørgensen ME. Progressive decline in
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate in patients
with diabetes after moderate loss in kidney
function-even without albuminuria. Diabetes Care
2019;42:1886–1894
22. Levey AS, Coresh J, Balk E, et al.; National
Kidney Foundation. National Kidney Foundation
practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease:
evaluation, classiﬁcation, and stratiﬁcation. Ann
Intern Med 2003;139:137–147
23. Matzke GR, Aronoff GR, Atkinson AJ, Jr, et al.
Drug dosing consideration in patients with acute
and chronic kidney disease-a clinical update from
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO). Kidney Int 2011;80:1122–1137
24. Coresh J, Turin TC, Matsushita K, et al.
Decline in estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
and subsequent risk of end-stage renal disease
and mortality. JAMA 2014;311:2518–2531
25. Vassalotti JA, Centor R, Turner BJ, Greer RC,
Choi M, Sequist TD, National Kidney Foundation
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative.
Practical approach to detection and management
of chronic kidney disease for the primary care
clinician. Am J Med 2016;129:153–162.e157
26. Zhou J, Liu Y, Tang Y, et al. A comparison of
RIFLE, AKIN, KDIGO, and Cys-C criteria for the
deﬁnition of acute kidney injury in critically ill
patients. Int Urol Nephrol 2016;48:125–132
27. Hoste EAJ, Kellum JA, Selby NM, et al. Global
epidemiology and outcomes of acute kidney
injury. Nat Rev Nephrol 2018;14:607–625
28. James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al.;
CKD Prognosis Consortium. A meta-analysis of
the association of estimated GFR, albuminuria,
diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with acute
kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:602–612
29. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.;
CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliﬂozin and
renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306
30. Nadkarni GN, Ferrandino R, Chang A, et al.
Acute kidney injury in patients on SGLT2 inhibitors:
a propensity-matched analysis. Diabetes Care 2017;
40:1479–1485
31. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin
and progression of kidney disease in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;375:323–334
32. Neuen BL, Ohkuma T, Neal B, et al.
Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with canagliﬂozin according to baseline kidney function.
Circulation 2018;138:1537–1550
33. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Effect of ﬁnerenone
on chronic kidney disease outcomes in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2219–2229
34. Thakar CV, Christianson A, Himmelfarb J,
Leonard AC. Acute kidney injury episodes and
chronic kidney disease risk in diabetes mellitus.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011;6:2567–2572
35. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor-associated elevations in serum
creatinine: is this a cause for concern? Arch
Intern Med 2000;160:685–693

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

36. Collard D, Brouwer TF, Peters RJG, Vogt L,
van den Born B-JH. Creatinine rise during blood
pressure therapy and the risk of adverse clinical
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Hypertension 2018;72:1337–1344
37. Malhotra R, Craven T, Ambrosius WT, et al.;
SPRINT Research Group. Effects of intensive
blood pressure lowering on kidney tubule injury
in CKD: a longitudinal subgroup analysis in
SPRINT. Am J Kidney Dis 2019;73:21–30
38. Hughes-Austin JM, Rifkin DE, Beben T, et al.
The relation of serum potassium concentration
with cardiovascular events and mortality in
community-living individuals. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2017;12:245–252
39. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al.
Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-angiotensin
system blockade: the Stockholm Creatinine
Measurements (SCREAM) project. J Am Heart
Assoc 2017;6
€ ov J, et al.
40. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, Arnl€
Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J
Cardiol 2017;245:277–284
41. Zelniker TA, Raz I, Mosenzon O, et al. Effect of
dapagliﬂozin on cardiovascular outcomes according
to baseline kidney function and albuminuria status
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a prespeciﬁed
secondary analysis of a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Cardiol 2021;6:801–810
42. Epstein M, Reaven NL, Funk SE, McGaughey
KJ, Oestreicher N, Knispel J. Evaluation of the
treatment gap between clinical guidelines and
the utilization of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system inhibitors. Am J Manag Care 2015;21:
S212–220
43. de Boer IH, Gao X, Cleary PA, et al.; Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications (DCCT/
EDIC) Research Group. Albuminuria changes and
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 1
diabetes: the DCCT/EDIC study. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2016;11:1969–1977
44. Sumida K, Molnar MZ, Potukuchi PK, et al.
Changes in albuminuria and subsequent risk of
incident kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2017;12:1941–1949
45. Wexler DJ, de Boer IH, Ghosh A, et al.; GRADE
Research Group. Comparative effects of glucoselowering medications on kidney outcomes in type 2
diabetes: the GRADE randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Intern Med 2023;183:705–714
46. Klahr S, Levey AS, Beck GJ, et al.;
Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease Study
Group. The effects of dietary protein restriction
and blood-pressure control on the progression of
chronic renal disease. N Engl J Med 1994;330:
877–884
47. Ikizler TA, Burrowes JD, Byham-Gray LD, et al.
KDOQI clinical practice guideline for nutrition in
CKD: 2020 update. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;76:
S1–S107
48. Rhee CM, Wang AY-M, Biruete A, et al.
Nutritional and dietary management of chronic
kidney disease under conservative and preservative kidney care without dialysis. J Ren Nutr
2023;33:S56–S66
49. Mills KT, Chen J, Yang W, et al.; Chronic Renal
Insufﬁciency Cohort (CRIC) Study Investigators.
Sodium excretion and the risk of cardiovascular
disease in patients with chronic kidney disease.
JAMA 2016;315:2200–2210

50. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention,
detection, evaluation, and management of high
blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Hypertension 2018;71:1269–
1324
51. Murray DP, Young L, Waller J, et al. Is dietary
protein intake predictive of 1-year mortality in
dialysis patients? Am J Med Sci 2018;356:
234–243
52. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effect of
intensive diabetes treatment on albuminuria in
type 1 diabetes: long-term follow-up of the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2014;2:793–800
53. de Boer IH, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al.; DCCT/
EDIC Research Group. Intensive diabetes therapy
and glomerular ﬁltration rate in type 1 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2011;365:2366–2376
54. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with
sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications
in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33).
Lancet 1998;352:837–853
55. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood
glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:
2560–2572
56. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.;
ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment
of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in
type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD
randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430
57. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up of
blood-pressure lowering and glucose control in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1392–
1406
58. Zoungas S, Arima H, Gerstein HC, et al.;
Collaborators on Trials of Lowering Glucose
(CONTROL) group. Effects of intensive glucose
control on microvascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of individual
participant data from randomised controlled
trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:431–
437
59. Agrawal L, Azad N, Bahn GD, et al.; VADT
Study Group. Long-term follow-up of intensive
glycaemic control on renal outcomes in the
Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT). Diabetologia
2018;61:295–299
60. Papademetriou V, Lovato L, Doumas M,
et al.; ACCORD Study Group. Chronic kidney
disease and intensive glycemic control increase
cardiovascular risk in patients with type 2
diabetes. Kidney Int 2015;87:649–659
61. Perkovic V, Heerspink HL, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive glucose
control improves kidney outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes. Kidney Int 2013;83:517–523
62. Wong MG, Perkovic V, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Long-term
beneﬁts of intensive glucose control for preventing end-stage kidney disease: ADVANCE-ON.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:694–700

S249

S250

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

63. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical
practice guideline for diabetes and CKD: 2012
update. Am J Kidney Dis 2012;60:850–886
64. Tuttle KR, Bakris GL, Bilous RW, et al. Diabetic
kidney disease: a report from an ADA Consensus
Conference. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2864–2883
65. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) Diabetes Work Group. KDIGO 2022 clinical
practice guideline for diabetes management in
chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2022;102:
S1–S127
66. Leehey DJ, Zhang JH, Emanuele NV, et al.; VA
NEPHRON-D Study Group. BP and renal outcomes
in diabetic kidney disease: the Veterans Affairs
Nephropathy in Diabetes Trial. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2015;10:2159–2169
67. Emdin CA, Rahimi K, Neal B, Callender T,
Perkovic V, Patel A. Blood pressure lowering in
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA 2015;313:603–615
68. Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, et al.;
ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive bloodpressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N
Engl J Med 2010;362:1575–1585
69. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight
blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular
and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ 1998;317:703–713
70. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al.
Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement
by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1273–1284
71. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al.;
RENAAL Study Investigators. Effects of losartan
on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J
Med 2001;345:861–869
72. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde RD; The
Collaborative Study Group.The effect of angiotensinconverting-enzyme inhibition on diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1456–1462
73. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al.;
Collaborative Study Group. Renoprotective effect
of the angiotensin-receptor antagonist irbesartan
in patients with nephropathy due to type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2001;345:851–860
74. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation
Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people
with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study
and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet 2000;355:
253–259
75. Barnett AH, Bain SC, Bouter P, et al.;
Diabetics Exposed to Telmisartan and Enalapril
Study Group. Angiotensin-receptor blockade versus
converting-enzyme inhibition in type 2 diabetes
and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2004;351:
1952–1961
76. Wu H-Y, Peng C-L, Chen P-C, et al.
Comparative effectiveness of angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors versus angiotensin II receptor
blockers for major renal outcomes in patients with
diabetes: a 15-year cohort study. PLoS One 2017;
12:e0177654
77. Parving HH, Lehnert H, Br€
ochner-Mortensen
J, Gomis R, Andersen S, Arner P; Irbesartan in
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Microalbuminuria Study Group. The effect of irbesartan
on the development of diabetic nephropathy in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2001;345:870–878

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

78. Mauer M, Zinman B, Gardiner R, et al. Renal
and retinal effects of enalapril and losartan in
type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2009;361:40–51
79. Weil EJ, Fufaa G, Jones LI, et al. Effect of
losartan on prevention and progression of early
diabetic nephropathy in American Indians with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 2013;67:532–3231
80. Qiao Y, Shin J-I, Chen TK, et al. Association
between renin-angiotensin system blockade
discontinuation and all-cause mortality among
persons with low estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:718–726
81. Ohkuma T, Jun M, Rodgers A, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Acute increases
in serum creatinine after starting angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor-based therapy and
effects of its continuation on major clinical
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hypertension 2019;73:84–91
82. Ku E, Tighiouart H, McCulloch CE, et al.
Association between acute declines in eGFR
during renin-angiotensin system inhibition and
risk of adverse outcomes. J Am Soc Nephrol
2024;35:1402–1411
83. Hattori K, Sakaguchi Y, Oka T, et al. Estimated
effect of restarting renin-angiotensin system
inhibitors after discontinuation on kidney outcomes and mortality. J Am Soc Nephrol 2024;
35:1391–1401
84. Shulman R, Cohen JB. Navigating reninangiotensin system inhibitors in patients with
declines in eGFR. J Am Soc Nephrol 2024;35:
1309–1311
85. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Toklu B, Messerli FH.
Diabetes mellitus as a compelling indication for use
of renin angiotensin system blockers: systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. BMJ
2016;352:i438
86. Haller H, Ito S, Izzo JL, Jr, et al.; ROADMAP
Trial Investigators. Olmesartan for the delay or
prevention of microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2011;364:907–917
87. Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al.; ONTARGET
Investigators. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in
patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:1547–1559
88. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al.; VA
NEPHRON-D Investigators. Combined angiotensin
inhibition for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1892–1903
89. Cherney DZI, Perkins BA, Soleymanlou N,
et al. Renal hemodynamic effect of sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 inhibition in patients
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2014;
129:587–597
90. Heerspink HJL, Desai M, Jardine M, Balis D,
Meininger G, Perkovic V. Canagliﬂozin slows
progression of renal function decline independently
of glycemic effects. J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;28:
368–375
91. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.;
CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliﬂozin
and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657
92. Zelniker TA, Braunwald E. Cardiac and renal
effects of sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors
in diabetes: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2018;72:1845–1855
93. Woods TC, Satou R, Miyata K, et al.
Canagliﬂozin prevents intrarenal angiotensinogen
augmentation and mitigates kidney injury and

hypertension in mouse model of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Am J Nephrol 2019;49:331–342
94. Heerspink HJL, Perco P, Mulder S, et al.
Canagliﬂozin reduces inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis
biomarkers: a potential mechanism of action for
beneﬁcial effects of SGLT2 inhibitors in diabetic
kidney disease. Diabetologia 2019;62:1154–1166
95. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Trial Investigators. Liraglutide and
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2016;375:311–322
96. Cooper ME, Perkovic V, McGill JB, et al.
Kidney disease end points in a pooled analysis of
individual patient-level data from a large clinical
trials program of the dipeptidyl peptidase 4
inhibitor linagliptin in type 2 diabetes. Am J
Kidney Dis 2015;66:441–449
97. Mann JFE, Ørsted DD, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Steering Committee and
Investigators. Liraglutide and renal outcomes in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:839–848
98. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al.; SUSTAIN-6
Investigators. Semaglutide and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med 2016;375:1834–1844
99. Shaman AM, Bain SC, Bakris GL, et al. Effect
of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
semaglutide and liraglutide on kidney outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes: pooled analysis
of SUSTAIN 6 and LEADER. Circulation 2022;145:
575–585
100. Perkovic V, Tuttle KR, Rossing P, et al.;
FLOW Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects
of semaglutide on chronic kidney disease in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2024;391:109–121
101. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al.
Development and validation of a tool to identify
patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of
hypoglycemia-related emergency department or
hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:
1461–1470
102. Moen MF, Zhan M, Hsu VD, et al.
Frequency of hypoglycemia and its signiﬁcance in
chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2009;4:1121–1127
103. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
drug safety communication: FDA revises warnings
regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin
in certain patients with reduced kidney function,
2017. Accessed 25 August 2024. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-andavailability/fda-drug-safety-communicationfda-revises-warnings-regarding-use-diabetesmedicine-metformin-certain
104. Lalau J-D, Kajbaf F, Bennis Y, Hurtel-Lemaire
A-S, Belpaire F, De Broe ME. Metformin
treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes and
chronic kidney disease stages 3A, 3B, or 4.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:547–553
105. Chu PY, Hackstadt AJ, Chipman J, et al.
Hospitalization for lactic acidosis among patients
with reduced kidney function treated with
metformin or sulfonylureas. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:1462–1470
106. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al.
Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol
2021;6:148–158
107. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al.
Comparison of the effects of glucagon-like peptide

diabetesjournals.org/care

receptor agonists and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors for prevention of major adverse
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2
diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2019;139:2022–2031
108. Mann JFE, Hansen T, Idorn T, et al. Effects
of once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide on
kidney function and safety in patients with type 2
diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the SUSTAIN 1-7
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2020;8:880–893
109. Mann JFE, Muskiet MHA. Incretin-based
drugs and the kidney in type 2 diabetes: choosing
between DPP-4 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists. Kidney Int 2021;99:314–318
110. Bakris GL. Major advancements in slowing
diabetic kidney disease progression: focus on
SGLT2 inhibitors. Am J Kidney Dis 2019;74:573–575
111. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.; EMPAREG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128
112. Jardine MJ, Mahaffey KW, Neal B, et al.;
CREDENCE study investigators. The Canagliﬂozin
and Renal Endpoints in Diabetes with Established
Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE) study
rationale, design, and baseline characteristics. Am
J Nephrol 2017;46:462–472
113. Mahaffey KW, Jardine MJ, Bompoint S,
et al. Canagliﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic
kidney disease in primary and secondary
cardiovascular prevention groups. Circulation
2019;140:739–750
114. Heerspink HJL, Stefansson BV, Correa-Rotter
R, et al.; DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and

Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin in patients with chronic
kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2020;383:1436–1446
115. Herrington WG, Staplin N, Wanner C, et al.;
The Empa-Kidney Collaborative Group. Empagliﬂozin
in patients with chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med
2023;388:117–127
116. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.;
DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin and
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357
117. Chertow GM, Vart P, Jongs N, et al.; DAPACKD Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects
of dapagliﬂozin in stage 4 chronic kidney disease.
J Am Soc Nephrol 2021;32:2352–2361
118. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al.;
EMPEROR-Preserved Trial Investigators. Empagliﬂozin
in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction. N
Engl J Med 2021;385:1451–1461
119. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al.; EMPERORReduced Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular and renal
outcomes with empagliﬂozin in heart failure. N Engl
J Med 2020;383:1413–1424
120. Mosenzon O, Wiviott SD, Heerspink HJL,
et al. The effect of dapagliﬂozin on albuminuria in
DECLARE-TIMI 58. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1805–1815
 lvarez121. Romera I, Cebrian-Cuenca A, A
Guisasola F, Gomez-Peralta F, Reviriego J. A
review of practical issues on the use of glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor agonists for the management of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Ther
2019;10:5–19
122. Bomback AS, Kshirsagar AV, Amamoo MA,
Klemmer PJ. Change in proteinuria after adding
aldosterone blockers to ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin receptor blockers in CKD: a systematic
review. Am J Kidney Dis 2008;51:199–211

123. Saraﬁdis P, Papadopoulos CE, Kamperidis V,
Giannakoulas G, Doumas M. Cardiovascular
protection with sodium-glucose cotransporter-2
inhibitors and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists in chronic kidney disease: a milestone
achieved. Hypertension 2021;77:1442–1455
124. Agarwal R, Kolkhof P, Bakris G, et al.
Steroidal and non-steroidal mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists in cardiorenal medicine. Eur
Heart J 2021;42:152–161
125. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Finerenone and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic kidney
disease and type 2 diabetes. Circulation 2021;143:
540–552
126. Pitt B, Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIGARO-DKD Investigators. Cardiovascular events
with ﬁnerenone in kidney disease and type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:2252–2263
127. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD and FIGARO-DKD investigators.
Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with
ﬁnerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes
and chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY
pooled analysis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:474–484
128. Smart NA, Dieberg G, Ladhani M, Titus T.
Early referral to specialist nephrology services
for preventing the progression to end-stage
kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2014:CD007333
129. Liang S, Zhang X-G, Cai G-Y, et al. Identifying
parameters to distinguish non-diabetic renal
diseases from diabetic nephropathy in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis.
PLoS One 2013;8:e64184

S251

